# The Value of Embracing Fear
### Jonny West

While winter climbing earlier this year, I found myself being overtaken by fear. Unlike in my previous sport climbs, there was no simple down climb this time. The Elvis legs threatened, my hand grip tightened, my indecision grew. Yet, the panic never took over. Drawing from some ethereal reserve, I was able to take control of and momentarily transcend my fear. While there’s little doubt my inexperience wildly inflated my perception of the risk, the effects of panic would still have been very real. Overcoming my fear felt like a decisive and transformational moment, which has led me to reflect on the value of embracing fear.

For much of my life, I’ve been shy and self-conscious, perhaps partially explaining the inhibition-suppressing appeal of alcohol. When asked for my preference in a group situation, you might hear me say, “Oh, I don’t mind, whatever you want.” Though sometimes cute, this delegation of the decision reflected my unwillingness to take responsibility – a form of passive decision-making. I avoided unfamiliar situations due to the inherent uncertainty or perceived risk, hesitating or delegating until a decision was made for me. However, the more I avoided challenging myself and confronting my fears, the more engrained the underlying belief that I couldn’t confront my fears became.

Yet, as fear began to capture me in that isolated Scottish gully, I found that my relationship to fear had subtly transformed. Reflecting on this pattern now, two experiences stand as milestones in this transformational process.

The first experience came during my cycle tour around South Korea. Leaving central Seoul in the late evening, I had cycled through the night following the Hangang, happy to continue cycling rather than camp. As I turned away from the Hangang to head east up a tributary river, the day’s first light washed over the hills, flooding me with a sense of euphoria. I wanted to embrace the sun, fist punch the sky, cry, laugh and sing. My body felt weightless, my movement effortless, as I floated along beside the river.

All my anxieties and self-doubts about touring alone in an unfamiliar country far from my habitual comforts receded with the retreating darkness. The river wasn’t a beautiful location, but that didn’t matter. I had no purpose other than to move forward one pedal after another. For the rest of that morning, I cycled with the sensation that every element in my universe was perfectly aligned. This moment was temporarily forgotten by the following week, as I struggled against monsoon rains, humidity and dehydration. Nevertheless, it had existed and even now I can reach into that memory to draw resolve in unfamiliar situations.

One significant realisation I took from that sensation was that, for most decisions, the particular outcome matters less than the act of committing to a decision. Perhaps it’s that the voluntary aspect of decision-making ensures responsibility and demonstrates agency. All the same, having chanced on this realisation, I found myself increasingly willing to embrace unfamiliar and uncomfortable situations in other areas of my life.

My second transformational experience came while cycling through the Pamirs in late October two years later. I’d partnered with Pritam, another cycle tourist a week earlier, and – as a severe snowstorm had already passed through the region – we’d chosen to take a shorter, but more remote route through Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region in eastern Tajikistan. Leaving the M41 (the Pamir Highway) at Rushan, we cycled into the Bartang Valley aiming for Kök Jar, a 3,807m pass that would take us onto a plateau and across to Karakul close to the border with Kyrgyzstan. However, as we reached Savnob, the penultimate village before Kök Jar, a second snowstorm enveloped us.

Arriving in the dark, wet and cold, and in manic spirits, the situation felt desperate. Though only 130km from Karakul, we had no idea how many days it would take us to cross the plateau. Daylight was less than eight hours and temperatures after sundown were double-digits below zero. No one could offer first-hand information concerning the snow condition beyond the last village, although everyone speculatively told us that the pass was already closed by snow. We had no idea when another snowstorm would hit and, for a little added spice, I came across two wolves while heading to the toilet during the night. Pinned down in a single room for three days, with our host insisting that our only way over the plateau was for his friend to drive us in a 4x4 vehicle for $300, the situation felt intense.

The uncertainty of the situation permeated every aspect of my thinking. I had made substantial compromises during the previous four months of travel to cycle through the Pamirs. Yet, everything now felt so precarious. As the days idled by, the responsibility for the decision seemed to balloon. Eventually, as the skies cleared, we committed to crossing the plateau.

As I’ve reflected on these experiences, I see that they’ve nurtured my willingness to assume risk and endure hardship – something that I am privileged to rarely experience in daily life – transforming the narrative that I maintain about myself. In doing so, my sense of responsibility and psychological resilience has increased, and sensitivity to social anxieties and stress in daily life have reduced.

We each maintain a narrative about ourselves. This narrative is essential to our well-being. It is the well pool from which we give form to our existence. In its better moments, it offers coherence and direction. Though, in its less generous moments, it is excessively rigid and restricts what we believe we are capable of. We struggle to adapt to unfamiliar and uncomfortable situations.

If we don’t challenge ourselves, stretch the boundaries of our potential, our narratives can stagnate and solidify, becoming captured in self-reinforcing beliefs. For example, I found myself believing that I couldn’t speak a second language. Consequently, people responded poorly to my half-hearted attempts, reinforcing my belief and dissuading me from trying harder. In contrast, a propensity to embrace fear nurtures an ability to exist amid uncertainty and self-doubt without hiding behind comfortable patterns of behaviour – instilling an ability to live with and accept the fundamental essence of insecurity.

However, some cautionary reflections are necessary. First, there is the risk that the process of self-transformation can become an obsession or be commodified, in which case we lose our control over the process. Second, confronting fear needn’t involve danger. While overcoming greater uncertainty or risk appears to be associated with more radical transformation, I’m slowly learning to value the process of becoming over the state of being and have gained a greater appreciation for incremental over wholesale change. Finally, managing fear doesn’t mean defeating fear, it means embracing fear, which could involve retreating from a situation while retaining control.

After successfully crossing the plateau to reach Karakul, Pritam and I said our goodbyes, as he turned south to Mughab and I turned north toward Sary Tash, the first town in Kyrgyzstan. However, I had not accounted for the conditions on the north-facing descent. As I reached the pass at 4250m with the descent to Sary Tash at 3163m ahead, I found that the road was under solid, unbroken ice with knee deep snow on either side. For six hours, I attempted to ease my bicycle down the steep, exposed switchbacks, while repeatedly falling over. What I’d anticipated would take a day, now appeared to be a multiday hike-a-bike feat. With darkness having descended on my painfully slow downhill slide, mentally fatigued and contemplating two or three days with no food, headlights lit me up from above. As the marshrutka approached, the wheels struggling to find purchase on the ice, I decided to taxi it off the mountain. Naturally, the driver found space for my bicycle among the multitude of bags and the sheep that filled the back, and I settled in the last available seat. I was and remain disappointed that I finished by taking a taxi out of the Pamirs. However, I know that my disappointment doesn’t reflect a bad decision, but rather a lack of planning and mental weariness – knowing that sets me up better to succeed next time, the unfamiliar that little bit less unfamiliar.

I still have many fears and regularly shy away from uncomfortable social situations. Nevertheless, this journey has focused my approach on the fundamental question, do I trust and respect myself?
