# The Last of the Dirtbags
### Tim Carne

I was back in the van in the Grampians, Australia, when the restrictions on movement and closures of public places were in full swing.  In the week leading up to the day I left Melbourne, I was getting increasingly anxious about getting stuck in the city.  I kept putting it off though, as I wanted to finish up a few things while I still had the comfort of a room at a friend's house.  I kept an eye on the news and got everything packed and ready to go just in case.  I wanted to be able to make a dash for it if it looked like restrictions would come in suddenly.  The thought of being stuck in Melbourne while all this was going on seemed like a nightmare to me.  The means by which I could survive in that city - spending hours each day at public libraries, bouldering gyms, followed by long sessions in the spas and saunas of public swimming pools - these places had all been closed for business indefinitely.  I imagined myself getting stuck in Melbourne with the longing I would feel for climbing and being in the van on my own in the bush.  I imagined how miserable I would be stuck in the little room at my friend's house, hearing the traffic on the street, stuck like I would be on Youtube and Netflix, getting up late and being unproductive.

These scenes didn't come about, but when I did get to the Grampians I felt somewhat different about what I wanted to be doing.  Though I was still glad not to be in Melbourne, I found after a few days of being in the van again, I was fed up with the lifestyle and my enthusiasm for climbing was low.  I was just coming off the back end of a full year of dirtbagging, and had been feeling a growing need to occupy myself with something other than climbing.  This was enhanced by the uncertainty of the times and it gradually became clear - as the public places, shops and businesses started to close or change their services to adhere to the social distancing rules - that it was a bad time to be on the road.  More than this, I had the growing sense of a social pressure to stay put, making me feel like I shouldn't be doing what I was doing.  I felt this from listening to the ABC News, and from talking with friends who seem to embrace the "self-iso" meme well before I was even aware it existed.  This feeling of doing something that you shouldn't be is always with you to some extent living in a van, but in the current climate this feeling was tenfold.  Driving up the Western Highway I was worried every time I saw patrol cars, thinking they'd see the curtains in the windows of the van and know what I was about.  I had to keep reminding myself that the van really was my home and so had at least a semi-valid excuse to be on the move.  Sure if I really needed to I could go back to Melbourne and stay with friends or my sister, but for over a year now the van had been the only place that was legitimately mine.

I had arranged to met a climbing buddy at a bush camp near Golton Gorge inside the National Park toward the end of March.  The official campgrounds had already been closed but we thought we'd be alright camping in the bush, as that was allowed under normal circumstances in the Grampians.  I climbed a bit but mostly belayed.  In the evenings I would study an online course I'd just begun, and began to search for rentals in the surrounding local towns.  There was another couple at the camp whom my buddy knew, who had just started a year of dirtbagging.  I felt sorry for them having planned all this for months - doing up their van, saving up and quitting their jobs - and right when they had organised to hit the road the mania began, all the campgrounds closed and travel between states became unadvisable and eventually, except for the New South Wales-Victoria border, closed.  Another Slovenian couple who were friends of mine, who had been in Tassie for the last couple of months, also came up to the bush camp so we had a bit of a crew.  We all set up in different corners of the clearing and only went climbing in pairs.  This went on for a couple of weeks before I got offered a flat to rent in Horsham.  It turned out to be just in time as the next day a ranger rolled through the camp and told us the entire park was closing as of tomorrow.

Now with a 6 month lease I consider how I will spend my days for this period.  It's approaching mid-May and the radio tells me restrictions are easing in Australia and around the world, and a national plan for a return to normalcy has commenced. I'm doubtful and, though I do tend to lean towards bleak thinking, it feels to me like (and it already feels trite to say but… ) we're in a new world now.  I'd vaguely planned to travel next year, to continue the dirtbagging overseas, stopping in on some of the major climbing destinations.  At the moment that seems somewhat unlikely, I imagine it'll take some time for international travel to become easy like it was again.  It makes me think that perhaps there are many things that we took for granted that won't be so easy anymore.  I think my dirtbagging last year might come to be some fantasy belonging it an idyllic past.  Maybe not, but at least it gives me pause to consider that such experiences are perhaps worth more than memories fading like old curtains behind my eyes.  I've got guaranteed welfare payments till the end of November that will easily cover my rent and living.  My desire to climb is low, so it seem like a be good time to move forward in a different direction, toward something more creative.  The year past - all those months in Tassie and the Bluies, and the Gramps and Arapiles toward the end - has already got that generous fog of nostalgia over it.  If I force myself I can recall that even with the freedom of that time I felt stress and strain in myself, and the people I was with.  I think it would be good to write it down, particularly if that bleak part of mind is true, and such experiences do become a thing of the past.  Who knows, but maybe I and others I met (and didn't meet) who were living the same sort of life could end up being, at least for time, the last of the dirtbags.
