# The Solace of the Open Page
### Richard West

Have you ever stayed up at night wondering what life as a Wyoming rancher would be like? Well, you can rest up tonight with a copy of Gretel Ehlrich's 'The Solace of Open Spaces'. This gem will take you on a journey through space and time to a distant (and great?) America. Show me the person who doesn't enjoy a bit of escapism in these tumultuous times? The collection of carefully constructed prose are autobiographical and tell the story of a woman coming to terms with grief by moving to the wilderness. The world she inhabits is far removed from today's comfortable urban existence, as exemplified by the Basque shepherd who refuses medical treatment and instead packs sheep manure into his boot as a remedy for a cut. Yet, this was only 40 years ago in Wyoming. If adventure is embracing the unknown, this book is chronicle of that.

The book starts with an almost academic tone, Gretel as the outsider observing people in Wyoming. However, by the end, I felt she had become truly enmeshed and part of the community she is writing about. The boundaries between them and her become blurred. As Gretel writes about the cowboys she meets, "they don't know how to bring their tenderness into the house and lack the vocabulary to express the complexity of what they feel". As a community mental health nurse, I have worked with a lot of people who struggle to come to terms with their experience and for a number of reasons don't have the language to express it. We can all be overwhelmed by the experiences we have and for Gretel the slow pace of life in Wyoming was the antidote she needed to feel grounded and take control of her own story. Instead of life happening to her it felt like she had made some conscious decisions to live in her own way. I feel this and suspect it might be one of the major reasons I end up spending so much of my time outdoors, climbing and walking. I can feel in control of my life in a way that doesn't translate to my working or home life.

One of the thought I had following this book was how Gretel had been content moving to Wyoming and slowed down her pace of life. I found myself wondering whether if I had moved to Wyoming I would rather be focussed on finding training and recording my achievements in my UKC logbook. Rather than the experience and the hills effect on me. Always trying to catalogue and classify my experiences rather than simply having them. This book reminded me about the importance of being present in my outdoor pursuits and not always thinking about the next thing.

Akin to Zen Buddhism, Gretel observes the impermanence of the weather in Wyoming, observing an aliveness in the rhythms of the landscape and how this relates to our own psychology. "Everything in nature invites us to be what we are. We are often like rivers, careless and forceful, timid and dangerous, lucid and mudied, edying and gleaming, still." This meditative writing is reminiscent of Nan Shepherd's 'The Living Mountain', written over 50 years earlier and over 4000 miles away. The remoteness of Wyoming gave Gretel the time to observe the changing nature of her consciousness, notice the subtle contours of her thoughts. Her lyrical prose describes the contradictory nature of our own personalities sometimes analytic and at times emotional. The comparisons with zen come through in the total feeling I had when I finished the book, it was a calm and collected read. The sentences seemed to take their time in the same way I imagine how a zen priest would lay the table.

Finally, the line 'Disfigurement is synonymous with the whole idea of a frontier. As soon as we lay our hands on it, the freedom we thought it represented is quickly gone'. I am guilty of fantasising about what the life of a mountain hermit would be like. But would you really trade your freedom to choose from the banquet of modern life for the freedom of the hills? Maybe in fiction we can straddle both worlds.
