# What's It Worth To You?
### Tim Carne

The Grampians and Mount Arapiles are the centre of rock climbing in Victoria. Many consider these places to be the best in Australia and are a must for visiting international climbers. The Grampians is a massive bush and sandstone range, known for its bouldering, sport and adventurous trad climbing. Close by is Mount Arapiles, a striking quartzite formation rising out of the vast and flat Wimmera plains. It is known as the trad climbing mecca of Australia and home of the infamous 'Punks in the Gym' (32 / 5.14a / 8b+), a climb at one time believed to be the hardest in the world.

Earlier this month, two of the Grampians most iconic crags, Taipan and Bundaleer, were closed by the local state authority. The closures were over issues concerning the management of Australian Indigenous artefacts located in these areas. This did not come as a total surprise, as closures have been implemented for similar reasons at other notable crags in the Grampians since the end of 2018, while 'Special Protection Areas', which cover large portions of the park with other restrictions on climbing and potential fines, have also been established. Despite this, the closures of Taipan and Bundaleer have hit particularly hard given their significance to the climbing community and the feeling that, if even these places cannot remain open, then perhaps the worst is yet to come – the worst case scenario being the closure of significant portions of Mount Arapiles, which is by no means a far-fetched proposition. Earlier this year, an area at the mount, known as Declaration Crag, was closed due to the 'rediscovery' of nearby artwork. This artwork cannot be seen with the naked eye, requiring specialist archaeological equipment to detect.

I don't think that people outside of climbing or people who don't have similar passions of their own can comprehend the intense personal connection that climbers have to this sport and the places where it is done. I think of all the people over the last few decades who have lived in the Grampians and at Mount Arapiles to pursue their love of climbing. Climbers who elect to live in tents, cars or campervans, sometimes for years at a time, with little to no money, pursuing their thirst for progression and the testing of themselves, or simply just for the love of the culture of climbing and the landscapes in which it is done. To think of all those who change their lives to live out in these parts just to be near the rock that is the focus of such passion and personal connection, not to mention the community it provides for people who feel otherwise disenchanted by the standard options of modem living. All those who take long drives every weekend to be in these places, from Melbourne, Adelaide or even further, committed to the fatiguing life of the dedicated weekend warrior. These are people to whom these places are deeply significant, as evidenced by their continual presence. Many will say that what these places are being closed for is worth the loss to climbers. I don't think so. If you are a climber who agrees with these closures, I think that you should have more faith in the integrity of your own experience. Climbing embodies an important part of the human spirit, which should not be subdued by current political and media trends.

This article forms part of a series the next one will explore the indigenous perspective on this issue.
